422MATHEMATICSExample 1 The angle of elevation of the top of a tower from a point O on the ground,which is 450 m away from the foot of the tower, is 40°. Find the height of the tower.Solution We shall solve this in different steps.Step 1 We first try to understand the real problem. In the problem a tower is given andits height is to be measured. Let h denote the height. It is given that the horizontaldistance of the foot of the tower from a particular point O on the ground is 450 m. Letd denotes this distance. Then d = 450m. We also know that the angle of elevation,denoted by q, is 40°.The real problem is to find the height h of the tower using the known distance dand the angle of elevation q.Step 2 The three quantities mentioned in the problem are height,distance and angle of elevation.So we look for a relation connecting these three quantities.This is obtained by expressing it geometrically in the followingway (Fig 1).AB denotes the tower. OA gives the horizontal distancefrom the point O to foot of the tower. ÐAOB is the angle ofelevation. Then we havetan q = hd or h = d tan q... (1)This is an equation connecting q, h and d.Step 3 W
e use Equation (1) to solve h. We have q = 40°. and d = 450m. Then we geth = tan 40° × 450 = 450 × 0.839 = 377.6mStep 4  Thus we got that the height of the tower approximately 378m.Let us now look at the different steps used in solving the problem. In step 1, wehave studied the real problem and found that the problem involves three parametersheight, distance and angle of elevation. That means in this step we have studied thereal-life problem and identified the parameters.In the Step 2, we used some geometry and found that the problem can berepresented geometrically as given in Fig 1. Then we used the trigonometric ratio forthe ﬁtangentﬂ function and found the relation ash = d tan qSo, in this step we formulated the problem mathematically. That means we foundan equation representing the real problem.Fig 1MATHEMATICAL MODELLING            423In Step 3, we solved the mathematical problem and got that h = 377.6m. That iswe foundSolution of the problem.In the last step, we interpreted the solution of the problem and stated that theheight of the tower is approximately 378m. We call this asInterpreting the mathematical solution to the real situationIn fact these are the steps mathematicians and others use to study various real-life situations. We shall consider the question, ﬁwhy is it necessary to use mathematicsto solve different situations.ﬂHere are some of the examples where mathematics is used effectively to studyvarious situations.1.Proper flow of blood is essential to transmit oxygen and other nutrients to variousparts of the body in humanbeings as well as in all other animals. Any constrictionin the blood vessel or any change in the characteristics of blood vessels can
change the flow and cause damages ranging from minor discomfort to sudden
death. The problem is to find the relationship between blood flow and physiological
characteristics of blood vessel.2.In cricket a third umpire takes decision of a LBW by looking at the trajectory of
a ball, simulated, assuming that the batsman is not there. Mathematical equations
are arrived at, based on the known paths of balls before it hits the batsman™s leg.This simulated model is used to take decision of LBW.3.Meteorology department makes weather predictions based on mathematical
models. Some of the parameters which affect change in weather conditions are
temperature, air pressure, humidity, wind speed, etc. The instruments are used tomeasure these parameters which include thermometers to measure temperature,
barometers to measure airpressure, hygrometers to measure humidity,anemometers to measure wind speed. Once data are received from many stations
around the country and feed into computers for further analysis and interpretation.4.Department of Agriculture wants to estimate the yield of rice in India from thestanding crops. Scientists identify areas of rice cultivation and find the average
yield per acre by cutting and weighing crops from some representative fields.
Based on some statistical techniques decisions are made on the average yield of
rice.How do mathematicians help in solving such problems? They sit with experts inthe area, for example, a physiologist in the first problem and work out a
mathematical equivalent of the problem. This equivalent consists of one or more
equations or inequalities etc. which are called the mathematical models. Then424MATHEMATICSsolve the model and interpret the solution in terms of the original problem. Beforewe explain the process, we shall discuss what a mathematical model is.A mathematical model is a representation which comprehends a situation.An interesting geometric model is illustrated in the following example.Example 2 (Bridge Problem) Konigsberg is a town on the Pregel River, which in the18th century was a Germantown, but now is Russian. Withinthe town are two river islands
that are connected to the banks
with seven bridges as shown
in (Fig 2).People tried to walk aroundthe town in a way that only
crossed each bridge once, but it
proved to be difficult problem.
Leonhard Euler, a Swissmathematician in the service of
the Russian empire Catherine the Great, heard about the problem. In 1736 Euler proved
that the walk was not possible to do. He proved this by inventing a kind of diagram
called a network, that is made up of vertices
(dots where lines meet) and arcs (lines) (Fig3).He used four dots (vertices) for the tworiver banks and the two islands. These have
been marked A, B and C, D. The seven lines(arcs) are the seven bridges. You can see that3 bridges (arcs) join to riverbank, A, and 3 jointo riverbank B. 5 bridges (arcs) join to island
C, and 3 join to island D. This means that all
the vertices have an odd number of arcs, so
they are called odd vertices (An even vertex
would have to have an even number of arcs joining to it).Remember that the problem was to travel around town crossing each bridge onlyonce. On Euler™s network this meant tracing over each arc only once, visiting all thevertices. Euler proved it could not be done because he worked out that, to have an odd
vertex you would have to begin or end the trip at that vertex. (Think about it). Since
there can only be one beginning and one end, there can only be two odd vertices if you
are to trace over each arc only once. Since the bridge problem has 4 odd vertices, it
just not possible to do!Fig 2Fig 3MATHEMATICAL MODELLING            425After Euler proved his Theorem, muchwater has flown under the bridges in Konigsberg.In 1875, an extra bridge was built in Konigsberg,
joining the land areas of river banks A and B(Fig 4). Is it possible now for the Konigsbergians
to go round the city, using each bridge only once?Here the situation will be as in Fig 4. Afterthe addition of the new edge, both the vertices
A and B have become even degree vertices.
However, D and C still have odd degree. So, itis possible for the Konigsbergians to go around the city using each bridge exactly once.The invention of networks began a new theory called graph theory which is nowused in many ways, including planning and mapping railway networks (Fig 4).A.2.3  What is Mathematical Modelling?Here, we shall define what mathematical modelling is and illustrate the differentprocesses involved in this through examples.Definition Mathematical modelling is an attempt to study some part (or form) of thereal-life problem in mathematical terms.Conversion of physical situation into mathematics with some suitableconditions is known as mathematical modelling. Mathematical modelling isnothing but a technique and the pedagogy taken from fine arts and not from the
basic sciences. Let us now understand the different processes involved in MathematicalModelling. Four steps are involved in this process. As an illustrative example, weconsider the modelling done to study the motion of a simple pendulum.Understanding the problemThis involves, for example, understanding the process involved in the motion of simplependulum. All of us are familiar with the simple pendulum. This pendulum is simply amass (known as bob) attached to one end of a string whose other end is fixed at a
point. We have studied that the motion of the simple pendulum is periodic. The perioddepends upon the length of the string and acceleration due to gravity. So, what we needto find is the period of oscillation. Based on this, we give a precise statement of the
problem asStatement How do we find the period of oscillation of the simple pendulum?The next step is formulation.
Formulation Consists of two main steps.1. Identifying the relevant factors  In this, we find out what are the factors/Fig 4